Alright so continuing with our code. So
far we've tested this code with an item
that does exist in the list. Let's now
see what happens if that item doesn't exist.
So what I'm going to do is change line three.
Instead of searching for spam,
I'm going to search for albatross.
Alright, we're gonna run the program now,
and you can see item found at position None.
Now that message is a bit misleading - the item
wasn't found at all - but you can see that
None is coming from line four in our
code. We initialized found_at to None
on that line. Because albatross wasn't
found, line nine of our code wasn't
executed and found_at wasn't
given another value. It's very important
that we bound found_at to
something on line four. So let's see what
would have happened if we hadn't have
done that. I'm gonna comment out line four.
We'll run the program again. This time
you can see we've got an error, and the error,
right over at the right hand side
there, line 12. And on line 12 we're
trying to print the value of found_at
but it hasn't been given a value,
and in fact my IDE has highlighted
found_at on line 12,
if we hover over it, name found_at
can be not defined. So that's an error.
Now the code would work if albatross was
found, because found_at would
have been attached to a value on line 9.
I'd better uncomment that line to fix that error.
So that explains why we had to
initialize found_at,
but what's this None that I initialized it
to? Well None is a constant that
represents nothing. found_at
now exists but it doesn't yet have a
value when the code on line 4 is
executed. One thing we can use it for
here, is to improve the message we get.
Let's have a go at doing that, and we can
change the code. So on line 12, what I'm
going to do is add some code there:
if found_at is not None :
then we'll indent the next line.
Then we'll put an else to the left-hand
margin print parentheses double quotes
left and right curly braces
not found, and our double quote dot
format parentheses item_to_find.
And now that we've done that,
we run the program,
we get a better message when an item is
not found, as you can see here. So looking
at the code, we've initialized found_at
to None on line four. If
it's still None when we get to line 12,
then we didn't find the item we're
looking for. Alright I want to finish
this video now with an apology.
We shouldn't write code like that for loop,
on lines seven through ten. Python
is an incredibly rich language and one
of the reasons that it's so successful,
is because it comes with so much
included as standard. We've only looked
at a small part of the language so far,
and the examples I use have to reflect
that. Even then, I've had to introduce the
list type for this example. The code
demonstrated how to use break and why
you'd want to, but there's a much easier
way to write this code. So what I'm going
to do, so I'm going to comment out the
for loop
if item_to_find is
in shopping_list colon
found_at is equal to shopping_list.index.
Then in parentheses,
item_to_find, then we've
got a closing parenthesis there.
Run the program now, and you see we've got the
same result there. And just to confirm that it
is working, if I change albatross back
now to spam, which it originally was at
the start of the video. Run this, item
found at position three. So that also works.
As I said, Python is a very
rich language. It's got all sorts of
things included and we'll be seeing most
of them in this course, and you'll learn
what line thirteen is doing in the next
section of this course. I'll also explain
why lines twelve and thirteen aren't
very efficient and how we can improve
that code. Before that though, in the next
video, we'll look at another type of loop -
the while loop.
See you in the next video.